---
include: true
excerpt: ""
layout: post
title: alley
date: 2019-02-02 12:00:00 -0700
categories: poetry
math: true
comments: true
author: Aaron
---


last night, a short segment came on the news  
in between a report about a school fundraiser  
and a story about firefighters saving a cat.  

the story goes,  
a student walking home in the dark  
notices a body in an alley  
lying in a puddle of blood.  

nobody knows who this man is.  
no family members have come forward  
to claim him as theirs.  

the funny thing is he has a little bullet-hole on the top of his head  
right where the whorl of his hair meets  
in a perfect spiral.  

in a fifteen-second announcement,  
before the news station cuts to a burger commercial  
the local police department says they're working on finding out  
the cause of death, the guy's family, etc. etc.  

everyone knows in a couple days nobody's gonna care.  

the student who discovered him  
goes back to his dormitory  
then, buried in his courses,  
he'll forget this incident until  
ten years down the line,  
as he and his wife walk by the alley during their college reunion,  
he'll think,  
"huh, i wonder if they ever figured out who that guy was."  

the world moves on.  
the sun rises, the sun sets, the rain washes blood away  

and lost to the mists of time  
is the man who, in his immense emotional agony  
shoots a gun straight up into the air  
and, standing in this dark alleyway,  
shuts tight his teary eyes

an atheist who spends his life's only prayer  
wishing for the bullet to find him again  

rocking back and forth on his heels,  
whispering to himself:  
"glory paid to one's ashes comes too late."  
as the red-hot steel hits the height of its parabola  
and begins its screaming descent.