---
excerpt: ""
include: true

layout: post
title: delta 
date: 2019-06-17 1:02:00 -0700
categories: poetry
math: true
comments: true
author: Aaron
---


Two years ago, I witnessed my first Code Blue.  

For those unfamiliar, a Code Blue is the hospital code for a medical emergency. When a patient's heart stops working, for instance, a code is called. Those medical personnel carrying a Code Pager at the time receive a loud siren requesting their help.  

These are the most acute situations in the hospital. A patient who is coding requires immediate help -- otherwise the patient will die.

Two years ago, the resident I worked with was carrying the Code Pager. It went off, and in a heartbeat we were both racing down the stairs toward a dying patient.  

By the time we had arrived, a swarm of people had already begun to surround the patient, who by this point had been unclothed. One doctor at the foot of the bed was reciting a procedure from his smartphone. "This is minute 3 of a Pulseless Electrical Activity arrest. This is a man with a prior history of a stroke who ..." he began, reiterating the brief medical history of the unresponsive man in front of us. A line had begun to form around the physician who was delivering chest compressions. He slammed his palm into the chest of the dying man rhythmically.  

It was eerily quiet. The senior doctor continued to recite the procedure for a PEA arrest. The compression line grew longer and longer. Nurses were quietly whispering to each other. Occasionally, someone called out new laboratory results for the team to hear and analyze.  

There was no music. This was no television episode. The scene was ugly, grotesque, and oddly devoid of emotion. Amidst the occasional voices and commands in the throng of physicians and nurses, the only constant sounds were the body slamming into the bed, the beeps of the machines around the bed, and my own heartbeat in my ears.  

My resident quietly suggested that I join the compression line. "This is good for you to learn."  

So, in a daze, I took off my white coat, rolled up my sleeves, and went to the back of the line. Every two minutes, the person delivering compressions said "Switch!" to let the next person in line know that he was tiring and needed someone else to take over.  

---  

Not ten minutes after I joined the line, I found myself getting closer and closer to the patient. I was petrified. What if I was the one in line who would kill the patient? I'd never done chest compressions on a live person before. Would my thrusts be strong enough to maintain a pulse? What if I go too fast? Too slow? What if I get in people's way?  

And with these thoughts, I made an excuse to the person behind me. "Go ahead," I told her. "I need to take off my tie and wash my hands."  

I left my spot in line, took off my tie, washed my hands, and went to the back of the line.  

---  

In a PEA with no signs of improvement in the patient, it is reasonable to cease the Code Blue and pronounce the patient dead after about 20 minutes.  

This code did not end after 20 minutes. The code went on for a total of 45 minutes. Before long, I found myself again near the head of the line, three people away from delivering compressions.  

"Switch!"  

Excuses ran through my mind again. Did I forget something somewhere? Maybe I need to use the bathroom.  

"Switch!"  

I looked around. The line was getting shorter, and the man behind me looked expectantly. "You're up next," he said.  

"Switch!"  

I looked at the wreck of a body beneath me. An obese, bloody man with tubes everywhere, eyes taped shut, a lopsided mask over his face. He had a sunken chest. And there I was, a trembling medical student with no more excuses.  

I bent over and started compressing.  

---  

For two minutes I gave this man everything I had. I felt my hands sink deep into his chest where his ribs had already broken from the many hands that came before mine. A nurse had her finger on his pulse and reassured me that I was doing alright. I pressed like my own life depended on it, and beads of sweat formed on my forehead.  

This was nothing like I imagined.  

The flesh beneath my palms felt sickeningly soft, and the entire chest flailed like it was completely broken. The man had no reaction or awareness of his surroundings. Though the skin was warm, it was clammy. This was like torturing a bag of flesh, like mutilating a corpse.  

Two minutes later, I looked up.  

"Pause! Let's do a pulse check."  

There was no pulse.  

"Switch!"  

I left the broken body behind for another person to compress. Minutes later, the senior resident called off the code blue. The man would not recover.  

I wondered if he had purposely let the code go on so long to make sure I had a chance to give my first chest compressions.  

---  

Nothing worth learning ever comes easy in life. This is true for everyone. We learn by doing, by deciding to do, by taking a deep breath and a plunge and forcing upon ourselves the confidence that things will end up alright in the end.  

We learn to throw ourselves upon a dying man, to crack his ribs and deliver his heartbeats for him, even if it is a scary thing to do.  

We learn to tell ourselves the dirty truth of what makes us scared, and what we need to do to change that about ourselves.  

We learn that we cannot fix everything, but we can try our best to do what we can to make things better.  

And we discover that sometimes it takes Code Blues in our lives to break us out of our comfort zones and force us to grow in a way that makes us better people.  

---  

There are few situations in life so dire, acute, and traumatic as a Code Blue. But there are plenty of situations that -- like a Code Blue -- require us to muster the courage to do something terrifying and hard.  

Like falling victim to a person who manipulated you for his or her own gain, and coming to terms with the cold hard truth that your own desire for affection, your own issues with self-worth and identity, and your deep longing for making people happy have put you squarely in the position of being taken advantage of.  

Or, like realizing that you are the one who consistently and invariably destroys your friendships and relationships from a place of selfishness. And recognizing that this is a pattern that leads to irreversibly damaged outcomes, and knowing that it partially stems from your own sense of inadequacies or uncertainties or fears.  

And we can choose to acknowledge that this is a Code Blue, and initially we might feel like we have to go remove our tie and wash our hands so we'll deal with it later.  

But at some point, it'll come time for us to be at the head of the compression line. And the guy standing behind us will be staring us down telling us "You're up next." And we'll look ahead and realize there's nowhere to go but to confront our own fears, to just take the next step and start compressing.  

---  

In medicine, we realize fast that the way we become better doctors is by taking our failures and working on them, no matter how unpleasant the task. It is a hard thing to do, but for the sake of our patients it must be done.  


