
An Anecdotal Exercise Regimen for Thalassemic Patients



As a child, I never ever fully participated in gym class. The underlying assumption I had about myself was that I simply couldn't do the exercises. Every year there would be an end-of-year gym course, where each student had to run a 10 minute mile, climb up a rope, and do a set of 20 pushups to pass the class. I didn't think I could do it due to ambiguous health reasons related to thalassemia, so I always convinced my doctor to write me a note. My parents didn't try too hard to fight me, and as a result I went through my entire education without formalized exercise.  

It turns out I was wrong. I can run faster than a 10 minute mile. I can do more than 20 pushups. I can climb a rope. I can, in fact, do a lot more than this, and it took over 20 years for me to realize that pain from the strenuous effort required to improve in physical health is much different than pain that leads to diminished health. And what a shame it took this long, since I probably would have enjoyed sports as a kid. But our vision is 20/20 only in retrospect, and the next best thing is to take what we have learned and use it to change ourselves for the better moving forward.  

One of my long-term goals which I established four years ago was to learn about exercise physiology and how it relates to health and disease in patients with thalassemia. This ended up being much harder than anticipated, as the existing literature is filled with small correlational studies on a background of shaky scientific foundations. However, what has been more or less accepted in the field is that 1) transfusion-dependent patients have lower exercise tolerance, 2) transfusion-dependent patients can have cardiac changes secondary to hemosiderosis, and 3) these findings may be related.  

But the underlying directions of cause-and-effect are not well established. For instance, is the lower exercise tolerance secondary to anemia or to impaired cardiac function? Does psychology play any role in this phenomenon? How statistically significant are these studies anyway? How old are these studies, and were the patients involved in these studies as well-treated as patients receiving standard of care today? I posit that probably a lot of the exercise intolerance in patients are likely due to poor conditioning and a simple belief that they are not 'normal' enough to do normal exercise. Indeed, in a world-wide social network of patients with thalassemia, there is a small but burgeoning subgroup which has recently attempted to formalize and push physical boundaries beyond what they previously believed they were capable of.  

I begin with a short review of the literature and my interpretation of the science, and then share my own (albeit n=1) experience with exercise as a transfusion-dependent person, to comment on why there is likely much more room for improvement in quality of life for people with thalassemia and other similar diseases. I then share my routine, which I have been consistently following for almost a year, and discuss some of my results. Much of this must be interpreted with caution, as my baseline health is on a tail of the distribution that may very easily yield completely different results for others.  

# Review of the Literature #
