---
excerpt: ""
include: true

layout: post
title: On Labels, Loneliness, and Leukemia -- Lessons from Lunder 
date: 2020-09-16 1:02:00 -0700
categories: personal
math: true
comments: true
author: Aaron
---

If there's one lesson from residency so far, it's that communication is a far more important skill than medical knowledge. The ability to distill the essence of a patient's problems, trajectory, and plan, and the insight into which questions need to be asked, are far more valuable than knowing medical facts, most of which you can easily look up or ask someone else.  

Part of it is learning how to craft a "one-liner", a 30-second sentence including important details about someone's hospital course. Another part is identifying the types of biases you might communicate through the one-liner. And maybe the most important piece of it all is deciding what to believe from other people's descriptions.  

There's a lady in her 40s I met several weeks ago. She has a son who is just starting school and who got a new hat. She is suffering immensely from a relationship gone wrong. She is getting help, and things are looking better. She has hobbies: movies (mainly science fiction), reading (also science fiction), drawing. She's remembers everybody's name, and loves to talk to people. She has a complex dark history squirreled away in the back of her mind that she won't talk about. She's picking up the pieces of her broken past and mending friendships.  

She came to urgent care one day, tired and with back pain, and was diagnosed with leukemia.  

The next few weeks were a whirlwind for her: she was immediately sent to the emergency department, a masked doctor drilled a needle into her hip, she got meds that made her hair come out in clumps, her lips chapped and swelled up, her tongue got ulcers, she stopped being able to eat, she had a tube placed into her back, she had a scope shoved down her throat. Because of the pandemic, her son cannot visit; he's staying with a friend. She has no regular visitors.   

When I first heard about her, she was described as a "highly anxious woman chronic pain here with leukemia now on chemotherapy; her hospital course was complicated by kidney injury and shortness of breath."  

---

Dan Kahneman's concepts of "thinking fast and slow" are especially apparent in medicine, I think. There's so much pathology that sometimes the most efficient way to evaluate and diagnose a patient is based on their one liner, or "illness script". For instance, "man comes in with fever, cough, and shortness of breath, and you hear crackles in one specific area of the lung" makes you immediately think pneumonia. "Woman with alcoholic cirrhosis comes to the ED with vomiting blood" -- esophageal varices. These immediate test-like reflexes we have are important, especially for patients who are severely sick and need treatment quickly. But the cost of this mode of thinking is being especially susceptible to bias.  

When we say someone has a history of "chronic pain, fibromyalgia, and anxiety", it most commonly conjures an image of a patient on opioids for pain, with a pain syndrome that always changes, who is unwilling or unable to stop taking opioids and requires a great amount of coaching. Often, the unfortunate reality is that based on this one-liner we approach a patient expecting them to be a certain way, and it affects the way we treat them. It might make us reluctant to go see a patient unless we absolutely have to. It may make us skeptical about their complaints. And it absolutely creates a barrier between doctor and patient.  

We often forget in the role of a physician that seeing hundreds of patients over the course of the year desensitizes us to the patient experience. We compare each patient's hospital course to the extreme ones that we remember most. But for each individual patient, the experience of being diagnosed, wondering what it means for them to be sick, worrying about their loved ones at home, asking every day when they can leave and return to work, 
