---
excerpt: ""
include: true
layout: post
title: The Culture of Medicine - A Reflection 
date: 2021-11-15 1:00:00 -0700
categories: personal 
math: true
comments: true
author: Aaron
---

Three nights ago, I was assigned to supervise first-year doctors at the community hospital at a town outside of Boston. The night was predictably busy; as the hours passed, the hospital admissions started trickling in, and each of my interns began to meet new patients we would accept to our service.  

One gentleman was referred to the hospital because he had been dizzy, dehydrated, and vomiting over the past several days. Upon arrival his blood sugar was found to be over 500 -- he had a new diagnosis of diabetes. The resident got to work ordering insulin and fluids for the patient who was suffering from symptoms of severely elevated blood sugars.  

A couple of hours afterward -- as is typical -- the overnight attending walked into our workroom to discuss the new admission and offer her thoughts. What started as a normal routine of staffing overnight admissions, however, quickly turned sour, as the attending began to aggressively put down the physician who had referred this patient to the hospital.  

At one point, as my intern was introducing the story of this patient's recent symptoms, the attending interrupted and remarked, "What kind of piss poor physician at the urgent care clinic would tell this patient to go to the emergency department?" -- later explaining that diabetes is an *outpatient* problem that can be managed with medications such as metformin, and suggesting that the urgent care clinic had not done their job by giving fluids and insulin, counseling the patient about diabetes, starting him on metformin, and sending him home. Throughout the remainder of the intern's presentation, this particular attending continued to interrupt -- quizzing the intern, then me, about the preferred antihypertensive regimen for someone with diabetes, the price of Metformin at Walmart, etc. (and interjecting with remarks of how sorry our current state of education is that we were not attuned to the price of Metformin to patients without insurance).  

I write this piece not to single out the attending physician who, likely exhausted on a busy overnight shift, overlooked how many times she interrupted the intern during her presentation; nor do I suggest that her pearls on appropriate diabetic regimens for people without insurance were not well-received. I did, however, find it worth reflecting upon, as the interaction brought to mind some strong thoughts I have about medical education, physician burnout, and congeniality in the workplace.  

---

As a medical student, you go through 1-2 years of preclinical training, where you learn the fundamentals of how the body works and how biological concepts apply to medicine. You are given question banks, where every question has a right answer. You are graded with a number that represents how many correct answers you achieved. You are given a heavy textbook filled with mnemonics and other memory devices so that you can remember more right answers.  

Then you go to the hospital for experiential training. There, you are quizzed by the team about proper management of common diseases. What is the right antibiotic for this infection? What medication is correct for heart failure?  

You graduate medical school; you become a doctor. Your brain is filled with right and wrong answers for each clinical scenario. You start residency, where you hope to apply more right answers than wrong answers every day.  

But then residency starts, and it hits you that most things don't have a right or wrong answer. One attending will give lactated ringers for fluid resuscitation, then he will switch off service, and the incoming attending will replace it with normal saline, chastising the team for having given lactated ringers to begin with. One medical team will give vancomycin and cefepime for a pneumonia; the team two weeks later will look back incredulously and why the previous team elected to do such a thing. The longer a resident spends in the hospital, the more he realizes that there is no concrete answer for almost any clinical scenario; the data is all open to interpretation, and the management is finagled and personalized for the patient.  

There is a benefit to this madness. In some ways, it is reassuring that with every new team is a fresh set of eyes that thinks through a clinical problem independently and questions the management up to this point. It is a good thing that we do not assume the management plan we inherit is always the right one. But it is also revealing that medical decision-making is not straightforward. There is no right answer for most things. Clinical decisions are variable and incorporate the prescribing team's textbook knowledge, clinical experience, stylistic biases, and risk tolerance. And -- this is not to be overlooked -- clinical decisions can only be made based upon the incomplete data at hand *at that time*; incoming teams have the benefit of seeing in retrospect a more complete set of data, as well as the outcome of any given intervention. This is to say: at any given moment, we can only react and made decisions based on what we know at that time.  

While this exercise of arriving at your own answer and questioning prior decisions is important, I have found that many times this process is accompanied by the habit of perpetuating blame onto others. We find suboptimal medical decisions, correlate them with suboptimal outcomes, look to see who made that decision, and we announce to the people around us: what were they thinking?! What kind of doctor would do such a thing?  

In this process, we chuckle, shake our heads incredulously at how bad the other institution must be, pat ourselves on the back for our assessment of their flaw. And all the while, we insidiously create an environment where we and our peers wonder who else is whispering behind our backs about whether we're qualified to be doctors.  

This culture of secret badmouthing, of immediate assumptions about others' decisions, of jumping to conclusions about people's intent or stupidity, is what I suspect ultimately tips people over the edge into burnout. It has the capacity to take someone's passion for medicine and warp it into a dread of work.  

I believe that there is a role for Hanlon's razor in medicine: "Never attribute to malice that which is adequately explained by stupidity." But this is incomplete and requires one further step.  

Never assume stupidity where there may be a valid reason for an unusual decision.  

In the case of this diabetic gentleman who was referred to the emergency department for hyperglycemia at midnight, might it not have been the case that the urgent care clinic was closing in 30 minutes and that instead of sending the patient home with incomplete counseling and poor follow-up, the physician preferred to have him seen by a full medical team? Or maybe the patient was profoundly orthostatic and unable to tolerate even sips of water, which when combined with subacute weight loss and hyperglycemia would be a perfectly reasonable indication for an ED evaluation. The belittling of others, name-calling, and over-the-top judgment could have been avoided simply by having a conversation between the referring and admitting teams.  

This, I gather, is perhaps one of the most important lessons a doctor can learn in residency: that there is no perfect solution for most clinical scenarios, and where there is no perfect solution, a case can be made for any one of many imperfect solutions; that while we must never assume that a decision we see is "right", we should also never assume that a suboptimal decision is "wrong". For most decisions we see, someone has thought through the problem, passed it through their filter of knowledge, experience, and bias, and elected to take a certain action that was backed by some framework of reason. And perhaps the best way to react to decisions we wouldn't have made ourselves is to ask why it was made, rather than pass judgment up front. Maybe with more conversation and collegiality we can made the tiniest bit of headway in making medicine more team-based and less confrontational.  
